four years ago Rob Beauchamp had a
secure job with the Royal Bank today
he's a bush pilot living out a boyhood
fantasy in a world war two aircraft
flying an aircraft it's like being a
solo violinist at Carnegie Hall you've
got to do your thing right then and
there and you've got to do it right and
the degree to which you do it either
right or wrong is very very critical
there's a sense of satisfaction there
that's a lot greater than having made a
two or three hundred thousand dollar
loan well you know like when I worked on
the bank since Marco Polo went east
looking for spices to kill the taste of
his meat Europeans have been obsessed
with reaching outward in the process we
have created mythical heroes in our own
time the myth has settled on the bush
pilot more than just an aeroplane driver
the bush pilot is history itself pushing
the frontier north but on a blustery day
on the northern shores of Lake Winnipeg
history seems a long way away
at the southern end of Lake Winnipeg
where farmland ends and Bush begins sits
North way aviation home base for Rob
Beauchamp and the aeroplanes he flies
north way aviation began 25 years ago
when a trapper and fisherman named Geary
Johnson decided that flying over the
bush was better than walking through it
his son Jim brought up in the world Bush
flying does not share Rob Beauchamp's
romantic view of the bush pilots job
Alto large degree he's either a taxi
driver a bus driver your charter pilot
your your taxi driver if you're
scheduled pilot you're a bus driver it's
as simple as that
two early aviators flying north after
world war one the North looked much as
it had when the first Europeans arrived
three centuries earlier in 1690 Henry
Kelsey took canoes up the Hayes River in
1920 the canoe was still the universal
mode of summertime transportation the
North was a crucible hard and
treacherous larger than life
it was also full to the brim with wealth
and assure as the was gold in the ground
there would be men coming north to dig
it out of course the dirty work was
seldom done by those who got rich
Harry gamer has been a prospector since
he first came North in 1928 in the days
before diamond drills and motorboats
when one site was a whole summers work
the tools were picked a shovel a
wheelbarrow and even the blacksmith's
forge they'd have to pack all that
something from the paw all the way up
the Saskatchewan River and pass
Cumberland house which is one of the
oldest fur trading posts in the country
and it pack that all in here by hand and
it's an awful lot of work and then like
when I came in when I first went out in
the bush up on the Churchill River it
was all they give me was a attempt and
that was it never had any toilet paper I
never never never even Wow the
old-timers had laugh at you if you took
a magazine along and used it they used
to use grass or something like that and
airplane well you didn't have to pack
all that stuff and then you started
living better the airplane was ideally
suited to life in the bush every lake or
patch of snow was a landing strip
impossible muskeg became so much scenery
northern concepts of speed and distance
were transformed I'll never forget my
first airplane ride from my sis Lake
going up to Churchill River and cap
Stevenson healeth the pilot they named
the Winnipeg flying field after or later
on then after him we're fine along we're
going I don't know about 75 80 miles an
hour but I thought boy that was going
something the window was open a little
bit I figured if I put my finger out
there they just going so fast and
whipped my finger on oh but I young I
figured I'd take a chance I put my
finger out nothing half putting the
whole finger up nothing putting my hand
out nothing put it in us flying along
with my whole arm waving up and down and
then I look down and I stand hollering
either
Hey look at look at the duck down there
and yet then the duck got out of the
water and shook his body and horns on it
about four feet crossed oh there was a
moose if I could go back 40 or 50 years
and start flying then that would be just
great that would be ducky for me I'd
really like to go back
I'm displaced I'm in the wrong time I
think that in those days it was even it
was so much better to be a pilot because
it was a pioneering thing you were doing
something that was totally new and you
were learning while you've done it I I
admired my a lot of the old guys more
than anything I guess I admire them for
the ability to operate in the severe
cold no one now to operate in 40 50
below with that jump that there is
anywhere near the problem for instance
we've got fairly good radio equipment
some form of civilization at least other
people that we can land and communicate
with better our problem to be known if
we have any in the old days it wasn't
quite that simple you're faced with know
where you are or anything
well with the equipment we had there was
little rough at times we had an
open-cockpit airplane and flew in
temperatures as low as 55 below with no
heaters to anything else and passengers
were just about as uncomfortable as we
were by 1960 Hank Parsons had logged
18,000 hours over the North it had begun
in the depression when he and his
brother with the second hand biplane
headed north to find work late $25 in
their pockets and the full tank of gas
well we found out it wasn't such an easy
way of making a living out there wasn't
near the business there that we expected
than the fact that was a depression
anybody with an airplane would go to any
place they thought they could make a few
bucks the airplane was an idea whose
time had come
Harold Farrington made the first
commercial flight to the Red Lake gold
fields in 1926 by that summer Red Lake
was the busiest airport in the world in
1928 punch Dickens reached the Arctic
Ocean
he brought the mail the Edmonton papers
and fresh Florida oranges northern
isolation was coming to an end and the
men who were ending it were becoming
legends just by doing their jobs we'd
start out in the morning well a typical
day with the maybe 5 o'clock in the
morning and we'd have to pick up her go
and pick up some fisherman or a load of
fish or take a diamond drill out and
then we'd come back and there might be
an emergency call serious injured person
there sick person to one of these Indian
reservations or mining camps and we end
up there the next there might be a
report of a forest fire started
so we never knew when I went to work in
the morning what was going to develop
during the day we could be doing three
or four different types of trips so
where am I going to puff blue river
yeah three lakes there's six guys and
probably two canoes so you might have to
make two shuttles in between then back
to black cover and then just themselves
okay that should be the story and I'll
go to Lewis Lake three legs and back
it's 50 years now since Hank Parsons
learned to fly and punch Dickens first
reached the Arctic
but the bush pilots North is still a
frontier and the frontier is reflected
in his equipment and his attitude if I'm
going to fly and I really enjoy flying
but the milk run type of thing really
turns me on if I clean the Air Canada
Pacific Western type thing I could never
do that why not work in the bank it's
the same thing you wear a white shirt
tie yes sir no sir you know you're
sitting at a desk and autopilots doing
all the flying for you and when he's not
doing the flying the first officer is so
they get a lot of satisfaction from what
I do
300 years ago
Scottish fur traders brought the Indians
the iron tools that could make their
lives easier and would make them forever
dependent on the products of Europe
today in his weekly visit to the
communities around Lake Winnipeg Rob
Beauchamp supplies that dependence in
addition to the fur traders blankets
guns and axes the cargoes of this modern
Voyager include lumber frozen meat fresh
vegetables civil servants and disposable
diapers
while Rob Beauchamp supplies the
communities on the shores of Lake
Winnipeg his boss Jim Johnson heads
inland toward the remote lakes of
Eastern Manitoba his job today is to
find scattered native groups harvesting
wild rice among these lakes and buy as
much of their rice as he can for a
dealer in Chicago
this is the bush pilots traditional role
the goal between the representative of
southern society who must meet the north
on its own terms and persuade it to give
up the 12th
despite their outboard motors the Soto
people of pond gassy gathered the wild
rice in much the way they have for
centuries
it is here in this land where roads
don't yet go that the age-old
relationship between white trader and
native producers still remains their
ancestors made the decision to trade
peacefully with the European a decision
they could never reverse today these are
the lucky ones they still have something
they can still hold out for the highest
bidder
in two days Jim Jonsin will spend
$10,000 on behalf of the dealers in
Chicago to do it and do it well
he has spent a lifetime learning and
adapting to the Northland and its people
it is a timeless scene as old as trading
itself one that reflects a high degree
of mutual respect and mutual
understanding but more and more it is a
scene that belongs to the past for today
as always change in the North revolves
around the pursuit of wealth but in the
20th century the wealth of the north
lies not in its lakes and forests but
under them 300 miles north of the rice
harvest sits Thompson company town to
income metals rising out of the bush
like a suburb without a city Thompson is
the future of the north a future that
began 30 years ago in the mining boom
that followed World War two
in the feverish activity of rebuilding
for peace minerals played a key role
mining stocks soared as eager investors
poured money into the search for copper
lead zinc nickel and gold in the north
salad days for the bush pilots
prospectors went into the bush by the
planeload and with them diamond drills
survey crews gasoline oil food and camp
supplies often that were not enough
planes to do all the work jack lamb and
his brother Greg flying out of the PAS
Manitoba spent these years supplying
camps right across the North he'd be
gone for four three or four months at
our crack you see those are two hundred
two hundred fifty our months all you
want to do is get that trip over with
get your money do they go to the next
trip if the work is there just keep
going with it girl girl girl go
in 1956 it all paid off in CODIS covered
vast deposits of nickel in northern
Manitoba using all the power of post-war
technology and the immense cash reserves
of a multinational corporation inco set
out to build a mining town that would be
like no mining town before it
the new city would take the name of John
Fairfield Thompson the mining executive
who controlled inko from his office on
Wall Street Thompson the generation
later is a community of 20,000 with no
downtown but with four shopping centers
where any southerner can feel at home
today the need to adapt to the north to
meet it on its own terms and change with
it no longer exists in Thompson the
north of the bush pilot the fur trader
and the Indian has simply been
eliminated and now there are no new bush
planes being produced anywhere in the
world the planes that replaced them will
require runways they will carry bigger
loads but they won't land here whether
we call this progress or simply an
obsession with growth depends entirely
on our point of view so white man you
know thinks she's always doing good way
putting enrolled in where roads don't
belong you know if every placement also
have a roll dish to put a road to them
on top of Mount Everest for the people
who want to climb this they don't have
to work so hard it's unfortunate the
government's don't see this there are
various the people just shouldn't have a
road in to so they can do the things
that they want to do
a float plane will never leave a mark in
the water no work and all you hear is
the sound see the ripple in the water in
a few minutes it's all go
you